Expect the unexpected.
Well, the unexpected
has arrived, hasn’t it?
None of us expected
that this graduation program
would need to be modified
and changed as it is.
And yet, what have you had to do?
You’ve had to accept the unexpected.
There’s not much you can do.
And we’d like to commend you students,
soon-to-be graduates of this class of Gilead,
because you have accepted these changes
in a fine, positive attitude.
But it does highlight to us
—doesn’t it?—
that sometimes it can be disappointing
when unexpected things occur.
Now soon, you’ll be going
to your assignments,
whether back home or to a new assignment.
And, no doubt, you are going to face
some unexpected things as well.
And we’d just like to discuss
one aspect of this theme.
If you’d like to take your Bibles
and turn with me to Ecclesiastes chapter 10,
Ecclesiastes 10:7,
and here it describes something
that is unexpected:
“I have seen servants on horseback
but princes walking
on foot just like servants.”
Well, you wouldn’t expect
to see that, would you?
Now, how are you going to see that?
Well, The Watchtower
made a very interesting comment
about this verse that said:
“Those who have great ability
“do not always receive the recognition.
“And those with less ability
sometimes receive more honor.”
So when you arrive back full of enthusiasm
—you’ve enjoyed your Gilead training,
and no doubt you’re thinking:
‘I’m a different person. I’ve changed.’
And we hope you have.
Maybe you might expect
that there will be
certain privileges granted to you.
And yet, at the same time,
you may see that someone you don’t expect
is given those privileges.
They may even come up
to you and say: “I’m so surprised!
I’m shocked they’ve given me this privilege!”
And outwardly you say, “Hmm,”
but inwardly you’re saying: “I’m shocked too,
“because I’m the one
who is trained at Gilead.
Surely I should get this privilege.”
But when you think about it,
remember that Jehovah is the one
who is backing the work, and at times,
he does the unexpected and, in this case,
gives someone we don’t expect a privilege.
Think about it for a few moments.
When you first came here,
we know and remember your introductions,
and quite a number of you made the comment:
“When we received that invitation
to Gilead, we were shocked!
“We were humbled.
“We were amazed, numb all over,
thinking why we were selected.”
And maybe some of the people
in your congregation and branch
were also saying,
“Why were they accepted?”
You see, maybe
that was an unexpected invitation.
But now, here you are about to graduate.
But it’s good to remember
that sometimes others are surprised
about privileges that we’re given.
So, what can help us to accept the unexpected
when it comes to others getting privileges?
Well, let’s look at two principles
in the Scriptures.
The first one is at Ecclesiastes 6:9,
Ecclesiastes 6:9:
“Better to enjoy what the eyes see
“than to wander after one’s desires.
This too is futility,
a chasing after the wind.”
So, in other words, be satisfied
with the privileges you do have.
Don’t be looking for other privileges,
just not satisfied
with what you’ve already been given.
Treasure the privileges you already have.
Included in that is the privilege
of coming here to Gilead and being trained.
Now, the second principle
we’d like to highlight
is found in the book of Psalms,
Psalm 119:31, 32:
“I cling to your reminders.
“O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.
“I will eagerly pursue the way
of your commandments
because you make room for it in my heart.”
What’s the point?
Don’t be disappointed.
Trust in Jehovah.
Trust in his arrangement.
It could be that Jehovah is saying to you:
‘Look, you’ve already had enough privileges.
‘You went to Gilead, remember?
‘Now be happy that I’m letting someone else
have an unexpected privilege.’
Well, that can be a test.
Another thing that will help us
in a situation like that
is to remember many
of the accounts in the Scriptures.
And one of those we like to refer to briefly
is that of David killing Goliath.
Let’s think for a few moments.
If you were an Israelite soldier
just before David offered himself
to do this assignment,
who would you have expected
to take down this giant, Goliath?
Well, probably, first of all,
you would have thought about King Saul
because, after all,
he was head and shoulders taller
than the average person
and he was a man experienced in warfare.
So you might have expected,
‘I think King Saul is the one
who will take this on.’
Or maybe if you
weren’t thinking of King Saul,
you might be thinking of his son Jonathan.
Why?
Well, remember Jonathan
was a national hero by this time.
There was the case there at Michmash,
where he and his attendant climbed up
and boldly and bravely
appeared before the Philistines.
They killed about 20 of them,
and that was the turning point in the battle.
So if anyone is going to take on Goliath,
probably you would expect
that Jonathan would be able to do that.
Now, let’s just assume
that you were thinking,
‘Maybe the best way to do this
would be with a sling and a stone.’
So now, who would you expect
to actually do this?
Probably Saul and Jonathan.
Why?
They were from the tribe of Benjamin.
And what do you remember
about the people from Benjamin?
They were experts with using the sling.
In fact, we’re told they could sling a stone
to a hairbreadth and would not miss.
And in fact, at 1 Chronicles 12:2,
it says that the brothers of Saul
were experts with the sling.
So not knowing what Jehovah was going to do,
probably each one of us,
if we were there back then,
would have thought that surely
it would be King Saul or maybe Jonathan.
They were the most qualified.
But why wouldn’t you have expected David?
Well, for a start, David was just a boy.
He wasn’t a soldier.
He didn’t have experience in warfare.
Yes, he’d killed a lion and a bear,
but he really didn’t know
about fighting people in a war.
Second, he wasn’t impressive in appearance.
In fact, Goliath was shocked
when he saw this young man
coming toward him.
And third, he wasn’t
from the tribe of Benjamin.
You see, he wasn’t one of these
famous persons who could use the sling.
The Watchtower made the comment
that perhaps because David lived near
where the tribe of Benjamin was,
maybe that’s where he learned
how to use the sling.
But the bottom line is
none of us would have expected
that this young man David
would have been used.
It was an unexpected event.
But now, let’s think for a moment
about how others reacted.
How did King Saul react?
Well, initially, King Saul was very happy
with the fact that David killed Goliath.
But what happened later?
That turned into jealousy
—didn’t it?—
even into a murderous desire to kill David.
But, on the other hand, what about Jonathan?
You see, Jonathan perhaps
could have been jealous, but he wasn’t.
He built a strong relationship
and friendship with David.
So, what can we learn from this account?
You see, if you come across someone
who gets that ideal privilege
—that assignment
that you always secretly have wanted
and that you
actually modestly think you deserve—
what will you be?
a Saul or a Jonathan?
Yes, brothers and sisters,
let’s always remember
that Jehovah does the unexpected,
and sometimes the unexpected is
giving someone else you don’t expect
a certain privilege.
Don’t stand in the way of Jehovah
when he uses someone else
to glorify his name.
Yes, rejoice in the fact
that others are used,
just like you are being used,
in an unexpected way.